Product engineers: LLM product metrics (#8396)
PostHog/posthog.com: contents/product-engineers/llm-product-metrics.md

Reviewer: Not sure what is going on with the preview for this (no title and sidebar from what I'm seeing): https://posthog-git-llm-product-metrics-post-hog.vercel.app/product-engineers/llm-product-metrics

---
date: 2024-05-03
title: 'Product metrics to track for LLM apps'
author:
  - lior-neu-ner
featuredImage: >-
  https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/posthog.com/contents/images/blog/posthog-marketing/marketing-hog.jpg
featuredImageType: full
category: Engineering
tags:
  - Guides
  - Product metrics
crosspost:
  - Blog
---

import { ProductScreenshot } from 'components/ProductScreenshot'

LLM-powered apps differ in three key ways when compared to regular SaaS apps:

> 1. Their costs increase as as app usage increases.
> 2. Request latency spikes and errors are more common.
> 3. You're not always sure if your LLM output is what was expected.

Reviewer: Could you use 1 subject here instead of 3 like:
```suggestion
1. Costs increase as as app usage increases.
2. Request latency spikes and errors are more common.
3. LLM output is unpredictable and can lead to a negative user experience.
```

This means that in addition to [regular product metrics](https://posthog.com/product-engineers/product-health-metrics), you need to monitor LLM-specific ones too. To understand which ones to track, we've put together a list of useful metrics to track.

> The metrics are grouped into three categories: [cost](#cost-related-metrics), [usage](#usage-metrics), and [debugging](#debug-metrics).

Reviewer: If I am thinking about what matters to the success of my LLM app, I might change the order to:
1. Usage
2. Debugging
3. Cost

Author: I think costs are always top of mind for LLM apps so I prefer to keep it first

> 

Reviewer: Do you want to add a callout here to say "to easily capture the data for these metrics, use our Langfuse and Helicone integrations"?

Reviewer: Also, does the data captured by these cover all the metrics?

Author: > Also, does the data captured by these cover all the metrics?

yes!

> 

Author: ```suggestion

>  **💡 PostHog tip: Use our [Langfuse](/docs/llm-analytics/langfuse-posthog) and [Helicone](/docs/llm-analytics/helicone-posthog) integrations to bring your LLM data into PostHog. Alternatively, we have tutorials on how to capture events from [OpenAI](/tutorials/chatgpt-analytics), [Anthropic](/tutorials/anthropic-analytics), and [Cohere](/tutorials/cohere-analytics).

```

## Cost-related metrics

### Average cost per user

**What is it?** Your total LLM costs divided by the number of active users.

**Why it's useful:** Gives you an idea of how your costs will grow with your product. You can also compare this to revenue per user to understand if your profit margin is viable.

**Questions to ask:**
- Are average costs going up or down over time? 
- If they're increasing over time, is it because of increased product usage or increased generation costs?
- What specific features or types of interactions contribute the most to the cost per user?

> <ProductScreenshot

Reviewer: Instead of the graph, it might be more useful to have the event series + filter details here, and maybe try out including the graph. 

It doesn't feel super useful to me as a reader to have a graph, how to set it up feels more useful.

Author: Cool. I've updated some of them (will do the rest monday). Do the new ones feel better? 

The p95 one uses hogql, so only included screenshot of the results and not the query (didnt feel super useful)

Reviewer: They look good now

  imageLight="https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/v1714658975/posthog.com/contents/average-cost-per-user-light.png"
  imageDark="https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/v1714658975/posthog.com/contents/average-cost-per-user-dark.png"
  alt="Line chart showing average LLM cost per user over time"
/>

### P95 cost per user

**What is it?** The top 5% of users who are consuming the most LLM costs.

> **Why it's useful:** Determines if specific users disproportionately affect overall costs. You can then investigate whether these costs are justified by their usage, or if there are inefficiencies to address.

Reviewer: Combine with session replays?

Author: hmm tried to tie them in but it comes across as too marketing-y

  imageDark="https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/v1714658974/posthog.com/contents/p95-dark.png"
  alt="Table showing P95 of users who consume the most LLM costs"
/>

### Average cost per interaction

**What is it?** The cost associated with each request in your LLM features.

**Why it's useful**: Enables you to pinpoint exactly which interactions are the most expensive.

**Questions to ask:**
- How does this number compare for each LLM model?
- Which specific requests are the most costly, and are there ways to reduce these costs?
- Are there noticeable spikes in cost per interaction, and what triggers them?

<ProductScreenshot
  imageLight="https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/v1714659411/posthog.com/contents/Screenshot_2024-05-02_at_3.16.24_PM.png"
  imageDark="https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/v1714659429/posthog.com/contents/Screenshot_2024-05-02_at_3.17.04_PM.png"
  alt="Line chart showing average cost pper LLM interaction over time"
/>

## Usage metrics

### Average usage per user

**What is it?** How frequently the average user interacts with your LLM features.

> **Why it's useful:** Indicates if your features have good traction and provide value to your users.

Reviewer: What would good look like here?

Author: rephrased

**Questions to ask**
- How does usage vary among different [cohorts](/docs/data/cohorts) or [user personas](https://posthog.com/product-engineers/how-to-create-user-personas)?
- What are the most engaged users doing that the least engaged are not?
- Are there specific features that drive more interactions? Why?

### Generation count

**What is it** The total number of times your LLM generates outputs per day, week, or month.

**Why it's useful** Helps assess the workload and demand placed on your LLMs, which directly impacts costs and performance.

**Questions to ask**
- How has the generation count changed over time, and does this correlate with user growth or engagement?
- Are there specific times of day or days of the week when generation counts spike?
- How do different app features contribute to the generation count?

### User feedback score

**What is it?** The quality of the LLM's output, as rated by your users.

**Why is it useful:** Strongly correlated with important product-health metrics such as [growth](/product-engineers/b2b-saas-product-metrics), [churn](/product-engineers/churn-rate-vs-retention-rate), and [NPS score](/product-engineers/nps-vs-csat-vs-ces).

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

**Questions to ask**
```

---
date: 2024-05-03
title: 'Product metrics to track for LLM apps'
author:
  - lior-neu-ner
featuredImage: >-
  https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/posthog.com/contents/images/blog/posthog-marketing/marketing-hog.jpg
featuredImageType: full
category: Engineering
tags:
  - Guides
  - Product metrics
crosspost:
  - Blog
---

import { ProductScreenshot } from 'components/ProductScreenshot'

LLM-powered apps differ in three key ways when compared to regular SaaS apps:

1. Costs are closely tied to app usage. 
2. Request latency spikes and errors are more common.
3. LLM output is unpredictable and can lead to a negative user experience.

> This means that in addition to [regular product metrics](https://posthog.com/product-engineers/product-health-metrics), you need to monitor LLM-specific ones too. To understand which ones to track, we've put together a list of useful metrics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means that in addition to [regular product metrics](/product-engineers/product-health-metrics), you need to monitor LLM-specific ones too. To understand which ones to track, we've put together a list of useful metrics.
```

**Questions to ask:**
- Are average costs going up or down over time? 
- If they're increasing over time, is it because of increased product usage or increased generation costs?
- What specific features or types of interactions contribute the most to the cost per user?

<ProductScreenshot
  imageLight="https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/v1714744519/posthog.com/contents/average-cost-light.png"
  imageDark="https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/v1714744520/posthog.com/contents/average-cost-dark.png"
  alt="Line chart showing average LLM cost per user over time"
/>

### P95 cost per user

**What is it?** The top 5% of users who are consuming the most LLM costs.

**Why it's useful:** Determines if specific users disproportionately affect overall costs. You can then investigate whether these costs are justified by their usage, or if there are inefficiencies to address.

**Questions to ask:**
- What common characteristics or usage patterns do the top 5% of users have?
- Are there specific feature interactions that result in higher costs for these users?

> - Is the high cost associated with these users sustainable, or does it suggest a need for pricing adjustments?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Is the high cost associated with these users sustainable or do you need to consider pricing adjustments?
```

<ProductScreenshot
  imageLight="https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/v1714744211/posthog.com/contents/Screenshot_2024-05-03_at_2.49.39_PM.png"
  imageDark="https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/v1714744214/posthog.com/contents/Screenshot_2024-05-03_at_2.50.01_PM.png"
  alt="Table showing P95 of users who consume the most LLM costs"
/>

### Average cost per interaction

> **What is it?** The cost associated with each request in your LLM features.

Reviewer: It is slightly unclear if this is cost for using the feature on top of LLMs or directly making the requests to LLMs? I'm not sure this matters, but maybe requires a slight reword.

> **What is it?** The cost associated with each request in your LLM features.

Author: ```suggestion
**What is it?** The cost associated with each request to your LLM.
```

**Why it's useful**: Enables you to pinpoint exactly which interactions are the most expensive.

**Questions to ask:**
- How does this number compare for each LLM model?
- Which specific requests are the most costly, and are there ways to reduce these costs?
- Are there noticeable spikes in cost per interaction, and what triggers them?

<ProductScreenshot
  imageLight="https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/v1715070402/posthog.com/contents/blog/cost-per-interaction-light.png"
  imageDark="https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/v1715070401/posthog.com/contents/blog/cost-per-interaction-dark.png"
  alt="Line chart showing average LLM cost per interaction over time"
/>

## Usage metrics

### Average usage per user

**What is it?** How frequently the average user interacts with your LLM features.

**Why it's useful:** Indicates if your features provide value to your users if they are interacting with them multiple times per day.

**Questions to ask**

> - How does usage vary among different [cohorts](/docs/data/cohorts) or [user personas](https://posthog.com/product-engineers/how-to-create-user-personas)?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- How does usage vary among different [cohorts](/docs/data/cohorts) or [user personas](/product-engineers/how-to-create-user-personas)?
```

- What are the most engaged users doing that the least engaged are not?
- Are there specific features that drive more interactions? Why?

<ProductScreenshot
  imageLight="https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/v1714743804/posthog.com/contents/llm-interaction-light.png"
  imageDark="https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/v1714743740/posthog.com/contents/llm-average-interaction-dark.png"
  alt="Line chart showing average cost pper LLM interaction over time"
/>

### Generation count

> **What is it** The total number of times your LLM generates outputs per day, week, or month.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**What is it** The total number of outputs your LLM generates per day, week, or month.
```

  alt="Line chart showing total LLM generation and trace count over time"
/>

### User feedback

**What is it?** The quality of the LLM's output, as rated by your users.

**Why it's useful:** Strongly correlated with important product-health metrics such as [growth](/product-engineers/b2b-saas-product-metrics), [churn](/product-engineers/churn-rate-vs-retention-rate), and [NPS score](/product-engineers/nps-vs-csat-vs-ces).

**Questions to ask**
- Are there specific user segments that are more satisfied or dissatisfied with the LLM outputs?
- What are the specific input and output tokens of the best and worst scores?
- How likely are users to churn from your product following a bad LLM response?

<ProductScreenshot
  imageLight="https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/v1715070752/posthog.com/contents/blog/generation-count-light.png"
  imageDark="https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/v1715070931/posthog.com/contents/blog/user-feedback-dark.png"
  alt="Line chart showing total LLM generation and trace count over time"
/>

## Debug metrics

### Average number of tokens per request

> **What is it?** The sum of input and output tokens consumed in each request. Also known as request size.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**What is it?** The sum of input and output tokens consumed in each request, also known as request size.
```

**Why it's useful:** Essential for optimizing performance and cost. Larger requests lead to higher costs and longer processing times, while smaller requests may lead to more frequent requests.

**Questions to ask**
- How has the average changed over time?
- Are there specific features or types of interactions that typically involve larger or smaller requests?

> - How do variations in request size impact the latency and costs of responses?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- How do variations in request size impact the latency and costs of responses?
- Which requests can be made more efficient?
```

<ProductScreenshot
  imageLight="https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/v1715072494/posthog.com/contents/blog/latency-light.png"
  imageDark="https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/v1715072493/posthog.com/contents/blog/latency-dark.png"
  alt="Line chart showing generation latency per LLM request"
/>

### Error rate

**What is it?** The percentage of requests that result in errors.

**Why it's useful:** Enables you to pinpoint problematic LLM requests and API calls.

**Questions to ask**
- What is the overall error rate, and how does it break down into user-facing versus backend errors?
- What percentage of errors are caused by timeouts?
- Are there specific features or scenarios that are more prone to errors?

 <ProductScreenshot
  imageLight="https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/v1715073420/posthog.com/contents/blog/Screenshot_2024-05-07_at_10.16.49_AM.png"
  imageDark="https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/v1715073421/posthog.com/contents/blog/Screenshot_2024-05-07_at_10.16.37_AM.png"
  alt="Line chart showing total number of LLM errors"
/> 

## Further reading

> - [PostHog for LLMs docs](/docs/llm-analytics) 

Author: Was planning on merging this into Joe's PR with the new docs page, but looks like that is going to take longer than expected now.
```suggestion
- [PostHog LLM docs](docs/product-analytics/llms) 
```

---

> date: 2024-05-03

Author: ```suggestion
date: 2024-05-08
```

title: 'Product metrics to track for LLM apps'
author:
  - lior-neu-ner
featuredImage: >-
  https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/posthog.com/contents/images/blog/posthog-marketing/marketing-hog.jpg
featuredImageType: full
category: Engineering
tags:
  - Guides
  - Product metrics
crosspost:
  - Blog
---

import { ProductScreenshot } from 'components/ProductScreenshot'

LLM-powered apps differ in three key ways when compared to regular SaaS apps:

1. Costs are closely tied to app usage. 
2. Request latency spikes and errors are more common.
3. LLM output is unpredictable and can lead to a negative user experience.

This means that in addition to [regular product metrics](/product-engineers/product-health-metrics), you need to monitor LLM-specific ones too. To understand which ones to track, we've put together a list of useful metrics.

The metrics are grouped into three categories: [cost](#cost-related-metrics), [usage](#usage-metrics), and [debugging](#debug-metrics).

> > **💡 PostHog tip**: Use our [Langfuse](/docs/llm-analytics/langfuse-posthog) and [Helicone](/docs/llm-analytics/helicone-posthog) integrations to bring your LLM data into PostHog. Alternatively, we have tutorials on how to capture LLM events from [OpenAI](/tutorials/chatgpt-analytics), [Anthropic](/tutorials/anthropic-analytics), and [Cohere](/tutorials/cohere-analytics).

Author: ```suggestion
> **💡 PostHog tip**: Use our [Langfuse](docs/product-analytics/llms#langfuse) and [Helicone](https://posthog.com/docs/product-analytics/llms#helicone) integrations to bring your LLM data into PostHog. Alternatively, we have tutorials on how to capture LLM events from [OpenAI](/tutorials/chatgpt-analytics), [Anthropic](/tutorials/anthropic-analytics), and [Cohere](/tutorials/cohere-analytics).
```

> > **💡 PostHog tip**: Use our [Langfuse](docs/product-analytics/llms#langfuse) and [Helicone](https://posthog.com/docs/product-analytics/llms#helicone) integrations to bring your LLM data into PostHog. Alternatively, we have tutorials on how to capture LLM events from [OpenAI](/tutorials/chatgpt-analytics), [Anthropic](/tutorials/anthropic-analytics), and [Cohere](/tutorials/cohere-analytics).

Author: ```suggestion
> **💡 PostHog tip**: Use our [Langfuse](docs/product-analytics/llms#langfuse) and [Helicone](/docs/product-analytics/llms#helicone) integrations to bring your LLM data into PostHog. Alternatively, we have tutorials on how to capture LLM events from [OpenAI](/tutorials/chatgpt-analytics), [Anthropic](/tutorials/anthropic-analytics), and [Cohere](/tutorials/cohere-analytics).
```

<ProductScreenshot
  imageLight="https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/v1715072494/posthog.com/contents/blog/latency-light.png"
  imageDark="https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/v1715072493/posthog.com/contents/blog/latency-dark.png"
  alt="Line chart showing generation latency per LLM request"
/>

### Error rate

**What is it?** The percentage of requests that result in errors.

**Why it's useful:** Enables you to pinpoint problematic LLM requests and API calls.

**Questions to ask**
- What is the overall error rate, and how does it break down into user-facing versus backend errors?
- What percentage of errors are caused by timeouts?
- Are there specific features or scenarios that are more prone to errors?

 <ProductScreenshot
  imageLight="https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/v1715073420/posthog.com/contents/blog/Screenshot_2024-05-07_at_10.16.49_AM.png"
  imageDark="https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/v1715073421/posthog.com/contents/blog/Screenshot_2024-05-07_at_10.16.37_AM.png"
  alt="Line chart showing total number of LLM errors"
/> 

## Further reading

> - [PostHog LLM docs](docs/product-analytics/llms) 

Author: ```suggestion
- [PostHog LLM docs](/docs/product-analytics/llms) 
```
